Added RFD 0144 - Client Tools Updates (#39805)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/0144-client-tools-updates.md

vulnerabilities are pushed to endpoints), bugs (fixes for resolved issues are
pushed to endpoints), and compatibility (users no longer have to learn and
understand [Teleport component
compatibility](https://goteleport.com/docs/upgrading/overview/#component-compatibility)
rules).

## Details

### Summary

Client tools like `tsh` and `tctl` will automatically download and install the
required version for the Teleport cluster.

Enrollment in automatic updates for client tools will be controlled at the
cluster level. By default all clusters will be opted into automatic updates for
client tools. Cluster administrators using MDM software like JamF will be able
opt-out manually manage updates.

Inspiration drawn from https://go.dev/doc/toolchain.

### Implementation

#### Client tools

##### Automatic updates

When `tsh login` is executed, client tools will check `/v1/webapi/ping` to
determine if automatic updates are enabled. If the cluster's required version
differs from the current binary, client tools will download and re-execute
using the version required by the cluster.

The original client tools binaries won't be overwritten. Instead, additional

> binaries will be downloaded and stored in `~/.tsh/bin` with `0555` permissions.

Reviewer: Note that this makes `.tsh` slightly more annoying to delete:
```
teleport:cloud stephen$ mkdir .tempdir
teleport:cloud stephen$ touch .tempdir/file
teleport:cloud stephen$ chmod 555 .tempdir/file
teleport:cloud stephen$ rm -r .tempdir/
override r-xr-xr-x stephen/staff for .tempdir//file? y
```
Probably okay, but `-w` on the owner doesn't provide much security benefit.

Might suggest `~umask&0755`

A file named `version.yaml` in the same directory will maintain the mapping
between proxies and tools versions, to support auto-purge and free up disk
space from unused binaries.

To enable concurrent operation of client tools, a locking mechanisms utilizing
[syscall.Flock](https://pkg.go.dev/syscall#Flock) (for Linux and macOS) and
[LockFileEx](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/fileapi/nf-fileapi-lockfileex)
(for Windows) will be used.

A side effect of automatic updates will be users will be able to connect to
different Teleport clusters (running different versions of Teleport, including
pre-releases) without juggling multiple versions of client tools.

```
$ tree ~/.tsh
~/.tsh

> ├── bin
> │  ├── 15.0.0
> │  │  ├── tctl
> │  │  └── tsh
> │  ├── 15.1.1
> │  │  ├── tctl
> │  │  └── tsh
> │  └── version.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
├── versions
│  ├── 15.0.0
│  │  └── bin
│  │     ├── tctl
│  │     └── tsh
│  ├── 15.1.1
│  │  └── bin
│  │     ├── tctl
│  │     └── tsh
│  └── manifest.yaml
```
More conventional to restrict `bin` to PATH-able binaries perhaps?

├── current-profile
├── keys
│  └── proxy.example.com
│     ├── cas
│     │  └── example.com.pem
│     ├── certs.pem
│     ├── foo
│     ├── foo-ssh
│     │  └── example.com-cert.pub
│     ├── foo-x509.pem
│     └── foo.pub
├── known_hosts
└── proxy.example.com.yaml
```

> Users can cancel client tools updates using `Ctrl-C`. This may be needed if the

Reviewer: Users might expect `ctrl-c` to terminate `tsh` and return to a prompt, since most human-interfacing CLIs behave that way. We don't need to use a signal for this, since it's not interrupting execution -- could just do `(hit 'q' to skip)`

Author: How strong do you feel about this? `Ctrl-C` does mean interrupt so it feels reasonable to use. Will be easy to detect as well.

Reviewer: When I've implemented non-terminating behaviors for `Ctrl-C`, I've noticed that users often hit it more than once, which can have unexpected results. It also requires de-registering and re-registering existing hooks. Reading `q` on stdin seems more straightforward to me.

That said, I have no preference at all -- `Ctrl-C` is definitely clear enough.

Author: Let's keep it at `Ctrl-C` for now, but I'll keep this in mind during implementation and share a few builds with you guys to see how it works out in real life.

```

If the version of client tools is 2 (or more) versions lower than the version
advertised by the cluster or 1 (or more) version greater than the version
advertised by the cluster, an error will be shown and will require the user to
use the `--skip-version-check` flag.

```
$ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com
ERROR: Client tools are N major versions out of date, update to vX.Y.Z.

Your cluster requires {tsh,tctl} vX.Y.Z. Update Teleport from
https://goteleport.com/download or your system package manager.

Run "tsh autoupdate enroll" to enroll in automatic updates and keep client
tools like tsh and tctl automatically updated.

Use the "--skip-version-check" flag to bypass this check and attempt to connect
to this cluster.
```

#### Self-managed client tools updates

Cluster administrators that want to self-manage client tools updates will be
able to watch for changes to client tools versions which can then be used to
trigger other integrations (using MDM software like JamF) to update the
installed version of client tools on endpoints.

```
$ tctl autoupdate watch
{"tools_version": "1.0.0"}
{"tools_version": "1.0.1"}
{"tools_version": "2.0.0"}

[...]
```

> 

Reviewer: Might be worth adding a `tctl autoupdate get` command as well, for integrating with polling systems that expect one-shot execution, like scripts.

  tools_auto_update: on|off

  [...]
```
```
$ tctl autoupdate update --set-tools-auto-update=off
Automatic updates configuration has been updated.
```

All Cloud clusters will be opted into `tools_auto_update: on`.

All new self-hosted clusters will be opted into `tools_auto_update: on`.
Existing self-hosted clusters will be opted into `tools_auto_update: off` to
not introduce unexpected behavior.

```yaml
kind: autoupdate_version
spec:
  # tools_version is the version of client tools the cluster will advertise.
  # Can be auto (match the version of the proxy) or an exact semver formatted
  # version.
  tools_version: auto|X.Y.Z
```
```
$ tctl autoupdate update --set-tools-version=1.0.1
Automatic updates configuration has been updated.
```

For Cloud clusters, `tools_version` will always be `X.Y.Z`, with the version
controlled by the Cloud team.

For self-hosted clusters, the default will be `tools_version: auto` matching
the tools version with the proxy version. This way, automatic updates will be
available to self-hosted customers by default, without any extra effort from
the cluster administrator.

The above configuration will then be available from the unauthenticated

> endpoint `/v1/webapi/ping` which clients will consult.

Reviewer: Should we eliminate `/v1/webapi/automaticupgrades` and centralize the properties to `/v1/webapi/ping`?

Author: @sclevine You sure we have that endpoint? I am getting 404 for both.
```
$ curl -sk https://localhost:3080/v1/webapi/automaticupgrades 
404 page not found
$ curl -sk https://localhost:3080/v1/webapi/automaticupdates 
404 page not found
```

That being said, I have no problem with us consolidating around `v1/webapi/automaticupdates`.

Author: Updated to use `/v1/webapi/automaticupdates` unless anyone has strong objections and thinks this information should be in `/v1/webapi/ping`.

Reviewer: It was previously channel-specific, e.g., `/v1/webapi/automaticupgrades/channel/stable/cloud`.

I have no preference, and slightly prefer `/v1/webapi/ping` so that it's easier get all version info in one request.

Just wanted to make sure that this RFD and https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/39217 are consistent. I'd actually prefer to update the other one to use `/v1/webapi/ping` 🙂

```
curl https://proxy.example.com/v1/webapi/ping | jq .
{

>     "tools_auto_update": true,

Reviewer: For agents, I'm recommending we include the following fields:
- Version
- Upgrade time OR immediate (can be a specific timestamp -- Cloud can translate window -> time)
- Jitter duration

Worth including for client tools as well, so we can stage rollouts of new client code?

https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/39217/files#r1546654653

Author: No objections to adding it to `/v1/webapi/automaticupdates`.

* Product: @klizhentas || @xinding33
* Security: @reedloden

## What/Why

This RFD describes how client tools like `tsh` and `tctl` can be kept up to
date, either using automatic updates or self-managed updates.

Keeping client tools updated helps with security (fixes for known security
vulnerabilities are pushed to endpoints), bugs (fixes for resolved issues are
pushed to endpoints), and compatibility (users no longer have to learn and
understand [Teleport component
compatibility](https://goteleport.com/docs/upgrading/overview/#component-compatibility)
rules).

## Details

### Summary

Client tools like `tsh` and `tctl` will automatically download and install the
required version for the Teleport cluster.

Enrollment in automatic updates for client tools will be controlled at the
cluster level. By default all Cloud clusters will be opted into automatic
updates for client tools. Cluster administrators using MDM software like Jamf
will be able opt-out manually manage updates.

Self-hosted clusters will be be opted out, but have the option to use the same
automatic update mechanism.

Inspiration drawn from https://go.dev/doc/toolchain.

> ### Implementation

Reviewer 2: Could we build some kind of observability around this and use this as a success criteria?

- for the users, so they know which versions their users are using. For example recording the teleport client version on login, and when an update happens.
- for cloud operations, so we know what's the tenant state and can send the apropriate communications/do the right maintenances
- for product decision so we can measure the tool update adoption for customers with dial-home:
  - report the versions of teleport tools
  - report if automatic tool update is enabled
  - report the OS distribution (mac/windows/linux, and which major version)

Author: Yes, definitely planning on adding observability. I'll update the RFD a bit later in development on exact metrics, but all of the above sound reasonable.

We'll have to do something to avoid duplicates and preserve anonymity, we can follow a similar approach to what we do for product metrics.

A `autoupdate_version` resource will be added to allow cluster administrators
to manage the version of tools pushed to clients.

> [!NOTE]
> Client tools configuration is broken into two resources to [prevent
> updates](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/lib/modules/modules.go#L332-L355)
> to `autoupdate_version` on Cloud.
>
> While Cloud customers will be able to use `cluster_maintenance_config` to
> turn client tools automatic updates `off` and self-manage updates, they will
> not be able to control the version of client tools in `autoupdate_version`.
> That will continue to be managed by the Teleport Cloud team.

Both resources can either be updated directly or by using `tctl` helper
functions.

```yaml
kind: cluster_maintenance_config
spec:
  # tools_auto_update allows turning client tools updates on or off at the
  # cluster level. Only turn client tools automatic updates off if self-managed
  # updates are in place.
  tools_auto_update: on|off

  [...]
```
```
$ tctl autoupdate update --set-tools-auto-update=off
Automatic updates configuration has been updated.
```

By default, all Cloud clusters will be opted into `tools_auto_update: on`. All

> self-hosted clusters will be opted into `tools_auto_update: off`.

Author: I'll add this how to use client tools updates to our documentation, but am thinking about waiting a bit before pushing it to self-hosted customers.

The main reason I am hesitating is because self-hosted customers often have multiple clusters they connect to, and automatic updates in their current form won't work well for them.

We want to address some form of simple or automatic updates for self-hosted customers as well, but we'll do it as Phase 3.

---

# RFD 0144 - Client Tools Updates

## Required Approvers

* Engineering: @sclevine && @bernardjkim && @r0mant
* Product: @klizhentas || @xinding33
* Security: @reedloden

## What/Why

This RFD describes how client tools like `tsh` and `tctl` can be kept up to
date, either using automatic updates or self-managed updates.

Keeping client tools updated helps with security (fixes for known security
vulnerabilities are pushed to endpoints), bugs (fixes for resolved issues are
pushed to endpoints), and compatibility (users no longer have to learn and
understand [Teleport component
compatibility](https://goteleport.com/docs/upgrading/overview/#component-compatibility)
rules).

## Details

### Summary

Client tools like `tsh` and `tctl` will automatically download and install the
required version for the Teleport cluster.

Enrollment in automatic updates for client tools will be controlled at the
cluster level. By default all clusters will be opted into automatic updates for
client tools. Cluster administrators using MDM software like JamF will be able
opt-out manually manage updates.

Inspiration drawn from https://go.dev/doc/toolchain.

### Implementation

#### Client tools

> ##### Automatic updates

Author: Added something about checking the hash to ensure the binary has not been corrupted.

permissions.  A file named `versions.yaml` in the same directory will maintain
the mapping between proxies and tools versions, to support auto-purge and free
up disk space from unused binaries.

To enable concurrent operation of client tools, a locking mechanisms utilizing
[syscall.Flock](https://pkg.go.dev/syscall#Flock) (for Linux and macOS) and
[LockFileEx](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/fileapi/nf-fileapi-lockfileex)
(for Windows) will be used.

A side effect of automatic updates will be users will be able to connect to
different Teleport clusters (running different versions of Teleport, including
pre-releases) without juggling multiple versions of client tools.

```
$ tree ~/.tsh
~/.tsh
├── current-profile
├── keys
│  └── proxy.example.com
│     ├── cas
│     │  └── example.com.pem
│     ├── certs.pem
│     ├── foo
│     ├── foo-ssh
│     │  └── example.com-cert.pub
│     ├── foo-x509.pem
│     └── foo.pub
├── known_hosts
├── proxy.example.com.yaml
└── versions
   ├── 15.0.0
   │  └── bin
   │     ├── tctl
   │     └── tsh
   ├── 15.1.1
   │  └── bin
   │     ├── tctl
   │     └── tsh
   └── versions.yaml
```

> Users can cancel client tools updates using `Ctrl-C`. This may be needed if the

Author: With this approach, we'll always download and re-execute from a `.tar.gz` archive.

That should actually resolve this issue on macOS right? No matter the install method (let's say you start with a unsigned package), the binary you execute will be a signed binary that can be used with Touch ID.

> Users can cancel client tools updates using `Ctrl-C`. This may be needed if the

Reviewer 3: Quick reply, will read the complete RFD later:

Touch ID needs the ".app" shell to work, the signed binary by itself doesn't carry all that is required.

Keeping the spirit of the design, you'll likely want something like this:

```
~/.tsh
└── versions
   ├── 15.0.0
   │  └── bin
   │     ├── tctl -> link to an eventual tctl.app?
   │     └── tsh  -> ../tsh.app/Contents/MacOS/tsh
   │  └── tsh.app
```

Also do note that macOS keeps tabs of where ".apps" are, and it can get wonky if you have multiple versions of the same app (as it may pick an unexpected one to execute on say, opened links). This is why we make [non-relocatable bundles][1]. Similarly for Connect, if that is a question.

[1]: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/d2dd5d395d030e76846781b6a5f79ac164dcbd77/build.assets/build-pkg-tsh.sh#L26

> Users can cancel client tools updates using `Ctrl-C`. This may be needed if the

Author: I tried using `pkgutil` and it appears to work, but I will do more testing.

```
$ curl -LO https://cdn.teleport.dev/tsh-15.2.0.pkg 
  % Total    % Received % Xferd  Average Speed   Time    Time     Time  Current
                                 Dload  Upload   Total   Spent    Left  Speed
100 66.3M  100 66.3M    0     0  10.9M      0  0:00:06  0:00:06 --:--:-- 11.1M
$ pkgutil --expand-full tsh-15.2.0.pkg tsh-15-pkg/
$ ./tsh-15-pkg/Payload/tsh.app/Contents/MacOS/tsh touchid diag
Has compile support? true
Has signature? true
Has entitlements? true
Passed LAPolicy test? true
Passed Secure Enclave test? true
Touch ID enabled? true
$
$ curl -LO https://cdn.teleport.dev/tsh-14.3.13.pkg
  % Total    % Received % Xferd  Average Speed   Time    Time     Time  Current
                                 Dload  Upload   Total   Spent    Left  Speed
100 74.8M  100 74.8M    0     0  10.0M      0  0:00:07  0:00:07 --:--:-- 11.1M
$ pkgutil --expand-full tsh-14.3.13.pkg tsh-14-pkg/
$ ./tsh-14-pkg/Payload/tsh.app/Contents/MacOS/tsh touchid diag
Has compile support? true
Has signature? true
Has entitlements? true
Passed LAPolicy test? true
Passed Secure Enclave test? true
Touch ID enabled? true
```

> Users can cancel client tools updates using `Ctrl-C`. This may be needed if the

Reviewer 3: `pkgutil` should work fine, although I can't speak for the particular invocation. I _think_ pkgs are just some kind of zip, so it may be possible to forego the external binary if you want.

> Users can cancel client tools updates using `Ctrl-C`. This may be needed if the

Reviewer 4: I think it’s xar file and we can use `xz` to unpack it 🥲

> Users can cancel client tools updates using `Ctrl-C`. This may be needed if the

Author: @codingllama Any issue with the above approach of extracting the application bundle and re-executing it? Seems to work?

user is on a low bandwidth connection (LTE or public Wi-Fi), if the Teleport
download server is inaccessible, or the user urgently needs to access the
cluster and can not wait for the update to occur.

```
$ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com
Client tools are out of date, updating to vX.Y.Z.
Update progress: [▒▒▒▒▒▒     ] (Ctrl-C to cancel update)

[...]
```

An environment variable `TELEPORT_TOOLS_VERSION` will be introduced that can be
`X.Y.Z` (use specific version) or `off` (do not update). This environment
variable can be used as a emergency workaround for a known issue, pinning to a
specific version in CI/CD, or for debugging.

During re-execution, child process will inherit all environment variables and
flags. `TELEPORT_TOOLS_VERSION=off` will be added during re-execution to
prevent infinite loops.

> Automatic updates will not be used if `tctl` is connecting to the Auth Service

Author: Updated RFD, but basically when you run `tctl` on the same host a `teleport`, it assumes a privileged identity that can perform all operations on the cluster. In this case if you are running `tctl` and `teleport` on the same host it makes sense for them to match versions.

over localhost.

##### Errors and warnings

If cluster administrator has chosen not to enroll client tools in automatic
updates and does not self-manage client tools updates as outlined in
[Self-managed client tools updates](#self-managed-client-tools-updates), a
series of warnings and errors with increasing urgency will be shown to the
user.

If the version of client tools is within the same major version as advertised
by the cluster, a warning will be shown to urge the user to enroll in automatic
updates. Warnings will not prevent the user from using client tools that are
slightly out of date.

```
$ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com
Warning: Client tools are out of date, update to vX.Y.Z.

Update Teleport to vX.Y.Z from https://goteleport.com/download or your system
package manager.

> Run "tsh autoupdate enroll" to enroll in automatic updates and keep client

Reviewer 5: What will `tsh autoupdate enroll` command actually do if upgrades are managed server-side? I couldn't find this in the doc.

Author: Forgot to update that section when I moved enrollment fully server side.

I'll update the docs links when I push the docs.

> turn client tools automatic updates `off` and self-manage updates, they will
> not be able to control the version of client tools in `autoupdate_verson`.
> That will continue to be managed by the Teleport Cloud team.

Both resources can either be updated directly or by using `tctl` helper
functions.

```yaml
kind: cluster_maintenance_config
spec:
  # tools_auto_update allows turning client tools updates on or off at the
  # cluster level. Only turn client tools automatic updates off if self-managed
  # updates are in place.
  tools_auto_update: on|off

  [...]
```
```
$ tctl autoupdate update --set-tools-auto-update=off
Automatic updates configuration has been updated.
```

All Cloud clusters will be opted into `tools_auto_update: on`.

All new self-hosted clusters will be opted into `tools_auto_update: on`.
Existing self-hosted clusters will be opted into `tools_auto_update: off` to
not introduce unexpected behavior.

```yaml
kind: autoupdate_version
spec:
  # tools_version is the version of client tools the cluster will advertise.
  # Can be auto (match the version of the proxy) or an exact semver formatted
  # version.

>   tools_version: auto|X.Y.Z

Author: This will be controlled by the Cloud team and always be changing. The idea is this way we can get the latest version out to customers faster.

the cluster administrator.

The above configuration will then be available from the unauthenticated
endpoint `/v1/webapi/ping` which clients will consult.

```
$ curl https://proxy.example.com/v1/webapi/ping | jq .
{
    "tools_auto_update": true,
    "tools_version": "X.Y.Z",

    [...]
}
```

### Costs

Some additional costs will be incurred as Teleport downloads will increase in
frequency.

### Out of scope

How Cloud will push changes to `autoupdate_version` is out of scope for this
RFD and will be handled by a separate Cloud specific RFD.

Automatic updates for Teleport Connect are out of scope for this RFD as it uses
a different install/update mechanism. For now it will call `tsh` with
`TELEPORT_TOOLS_VERSION=off` until automatic updates support can be added to
Connect.

### Security

The initial version of automatic updates will rely on TLS to establish
connection authenticity to the Teleport download server. The authenticity of
assets served from the download server is out of scope for this RFD. Cluster
administrators concerned with the authenticity of assets served from the
download server can use self-managed updates with system package managers which
are signed.

> Phase 2 will use The Upgrade Framework (TUF) to implement secure updates.

Author: What do you mean by facilitators? Like a SaaS service?

> Phase 2 will use The Upgrade Framework (TUF) to implement secure updates.

Reviewer 3: I meant some sort of library or reference implementation we could follow. It looks like a big spec.

> Phase 2 will use The Upgrade Framework (TUF) to implement secure updates.

Author: I don't have a good reference implementation to link you to yet. Once we get here I'll either update this RFD or create another with more details.

> Phase 2 will use The Upgrade Framework (TUF) to implement secure updates.

Reviewer 3: No worries, I was just curious if you knew of something.

compatibility](https://goteleport.com/docs/upgrading/overview/#component-compatibility)
rules).

## Details

### Summary

Client tools like `tsh` and `tctl` will automatically download and install the
required version for the Teleport cluster.

Enrollment in automatic updates for client tools will be controlled at the
cluster level. By default all Cloud clusters will be opted into automatic
updates for client tools. Cluster administrators using MDM software like Jamf
will be able opt-out manually manage updates.

Self-hosted clusters will be be opted out, but have the option to use the same
automatic update mechanism.

Inspiration drawn from https://go.dev/doc/toolchain.

### Implementation

#### Client tools

##### Automatic updates

When `tsh login` is executed, client tools will check `/v1/webapi/find` to
determine if automatic updates are enabled. If the cluster's required version
differs from the current binary, client tools will download and re-execute
using the version required by the cluster. All other `tsh` subcommands (like
`tsh ssh ...`) will always use the downloaded version.

The original client tools binaries won't be overwritten. Instead, an additional

> binary will be downloaded and stored in `~/.tsh/bin` with `0755` permissions.

Reviewer 6: Does that mean we don't have to worry about auto-update overriding the bundled version of tsh that has been [symlinked by Teleport Connect](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/rfd/0099-link-bundled-tsh.md)?

Say I install Connect v16 on macOS and symlink the bundled tsh to PATH. I then upgrade my cluster to v17. When I execute the symlinked tsh outside of Connect, it's going to download tsh v17, place it in `~/.tsh/bin` and reexecute the command. But then when Connect calls tsh again with `TELEPORT_TOOLS_VERSION=off`, it's just going to use the v16 version, do I understand this correctly?

Reviewer 7: @ravicious yes, `TELEPORT_TOOLS_VERSION=off` disables re-execution and update

[syscall.Flock](https://pkg.go.dev/syscall#Flock) (for Linux and macOS) and
[LockFileEx](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/fileapi/nf-fileapi-lockfileex)
(for Windows) will be used.

```
$ tree ~/.tsh
~/.tsh
├── bin
│  ├── tctl
│  └── tsh
├── current-profile
├── keys
│  └── proxy.example.com
│     ├── cas
│     │  └── example.com.pem
│     ├── certs.pem
│     ├── foo
│     ├── foo-ssh
│     │  └── example.com-cert.pub
│     ├── foo-x509.pem
│     └── foo.pub
├── known_hosts
└── proxy.example.com.yaml
```

Users can cancel client tools updates using `Ctrl-C`. This may be needed if the
user is on a low bandwidth connection (LTE or public Wi-Fi), if the Teleport
download server is inaccessible, or the user urgently needs to access the
cluster and can not wait for the update to occur.

```
$ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com
Client tools are out of date, updating to vX.Y.Z.
Update progress: [▒▒▒▒▒▒     ] (Ctrl-C to cancel update)

[...]
```

All archive downloads are targeted to the `cdn.teleport.dev` endpoint and depend 
on the operating system, platform, and edition. Where edition must be identified 
by the original client tools binary, URL pattern:

> `https://cdn.teleport.dev/teleport-{, ent-}v15.3.0-{linux, darwin, windows}-{amd64,arm64,arm,386}-{fips-}bin.tar.gz`

Reviewer 6: In the implementation PRs, did you take into account the fact that dev tag builds along with release candidates, alphas, and betas are served from a different domain? This has been a problem for Connect My Computer and other components:

* https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/42348
* https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/issues/42335

Reviewer 7: I'll create issue for this one, as far as I understand for first version we going to support stable versions only

date, either using automatic updates or self-managed updates.

Keeping client tools updated helps with security (fixes for known security
vulnerabilities are pushed to endpoints), bugs (fixes for resolved issues are
pushed to endpoints), and compatibility (users no longer have to learn and
understand [Teleport component
compatibility](https://goteleport.com/docs/upgrading/overview/#component-compatibility)
rules).

## Details

### Summary

Client tools (like `tsh` and `tctl`) will automatically download and install
the version of client tools recommended by the Teleport cluster.

The `cluster_maintenance_config` resource will be updated to include a
`tools_version` field to control the version of client tools advertised by the
cluster. This resource will not be configurable on Teleport Cloud. It will be
managed by the Teleport Cloud team.

If cluster administrators want to opt-out of automatic updates and manage
updates themselves, they will be able to watch the `cluster_maintenance_config`
resource for changes and push out updates to endpoints manually.

Inspiration drawn from https://go.dev/doc/toolchain.

### Implementation

#### Client tools

> ##### Automatic updates

Reviewer 2: I think there's the local `tctl` edge case. We should avoid trying to download anything if you're running `tctl` against a local teleport, as you're likely troubleshooting something and downloading potentially wrong version won't help. It's better to use the version from the same packages that installs `teleport`/`teleport-ent`.

Author: Sure, that's reasonable, I'll update the RFD.

The first time a user executes `tsh login` with a version of `tsh` that
supports automatic updates, the user will be prompted to enroll in automatic

> updates. This choice will be saved in client tools configuration.

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to allow individual users to opt-out? If you're a Teleport customer you might want to ensure that all your clients are enrolled into AU, or no client is enrolled into AU.

For the second case (enforce off company-wide), they have `tools_version: off` (except maybe for the cloud?), but for the first case (enforce company-wide), the RFD offers no way to enforce client AU.

Author: Hrm, what do you guys think about the following for `cluster_maintenance_config`:

* `tools_version: X.Y.Z`: If an exact version is specified, opt clients into automatic updates and install version `X.Y.Z`. This is how Cloud will operate.
* `tools_version: auto`: The new default for self-hosted clusters. Prompt the user to opt-in to automatic updates.
* `tools_version: off`: Do not enforce client tools updates.

Reviewer 2: It would work for simple use-cases but I think it would not support a Cloud customer wanting to install teleport from a trusted channel, like you described later in the RFD.

I recommend decoupling the version served, and the automatic update policy, as those are two different concepts. For example:

``` yaml
tools_version: x.y.z|auto|off
tools_update_policy: always|never|optin
```

A customer wanting to update clients on their own with an MDM but stream the version from the Teleport CMC events would be able to set `tools_update_policy: never` while we (Cloud) keep advertising the exact version needed to interact with Teleport.

Author: Talked with the Product team about this, everyone was onboard with enforcing automatic updates by default.

What do you guys think about this?

```yaml
kind: cluster_maintenance_config
spec:
  autoupdate: on|off
```

```yaml
kind: autoupdate_version
spec:
  tools_version: X.Y.Z|auto
```

This would allow turning off client tools automatic updates at the endpoint in `~/.tsh/config/config.yaml` or cluster via `cluster_maintenance_config`. We have to split it up into two resources because we want to prevent Cloud users from changing `tools_version` but still allow them to turn automatic updates on/off.

What do you guys think?

Reviewer 2: This looks good to me. My only question would be about what `spec.autoupdate` does. Does this applies for tools? agents? both?

MDM customers might want to disable tool auto-update while we still want to enforce agent auto-update by default for any cloud setup.

Do we want to split the CMC field in two:

```yaml
kind: cluster_maintenance_config
spec:
  tools_auto_update: on|off # can be configured by customers, even on cloud
  
  # out of this RFD scope but we might want to leave room for this flag to happen
  agents_auto_update: on|off # can be configured by customers, but not on cloud
```

```
$ tsh --proxy=proxy.example.com login
Keep client tools like tsh and tctl automatically updated? [YES/no]

[...]
```

```
$ cat ~/.tsh/config/config.yaml
enable_autoupdate: true | false
```

Once enrolled, upon login client tools will check the `tools_version`
advertised by the cluster at `/v1/webapi/ping`. If this version differs from

> that of the running binary, the recommended version will be downloaded and

Reviewer 2: Currently the proxy already served the exact same version, including pre-release details. The agent updaters are also compatible with this. I think it's nice to have for 2 reasons:
- local development and dev builds -> AUs are more testable
- if we ever need to ship a custom build for a tenant (ideally we should not, but I'm pretty sure we'll face an issue at some point and will want to ship a custom version with a hotfix or something)

installed.

The original binaries will not be overwritten by automatic updates, instead
per-cluster binaries with permissions `0555` will be stored at
`~/.tsh/bin/proxyName/{tctl,tsh}`. This will act as both a cache and allow
users to connect to different Teleport clusters (running different versions of

> Teleport) without juggling multiple versions of client tools.

Reviewer 2: We might want to have a lock so two `tsh`/`tctl` commands don't attempt to download the binary simultaneously, nor attempt to exec an incomplete binary. This often happens when shims like this are used in scripts, e.g. in CI.

Author: Yep, had that in mind, forgot to add it to the RFD. Will do.

```
$ tree ~/.tsh
~/.tsh
├── bin
│  └── proxy.example.com
│     ├── tctl

> │     └── tsh

Reviewer 2: There's one case where putting the binary in `~/.tsh` might harm us: when mounting the directory in a container/VM. The OS and architecture might be different and it will break. Using a separate directory might be a better fit. 

An alternative would be to keep the binaries named with the os/version/arch in the name in a single directory for all proxies and always pick the right one dynamically.

> │     └── tsh

Reviewer 8: Separate directory may also make sense since we'll support this for `tctl` as well (it seems odd to put `tctl` binaries in `~/.tsh`)

Note that at the time of this writing, there is both an OSS and enterprise version of tctl, but I hope that's no longer the case in the near future.

> │     └── tsh

Author: This is what I was originally thinking about doing, but it has a downside. The cache of binaries keeps growing forever unless you purge it periodically the cache.

I might be able to add some kind of auto-purge, but I would have to store and maintain a mapping of cluster to binary. Let me think about it some more.

├── current-profile
├── keys
│  └── proxy.example.com
│     ├── cas
│     │  └── example.com.pem
│     ├── certs.pem
│     ├── foo
│     ├── foo-ssh
│     │  └── example.com-cert.pub
│     ├── foo-x509.pem
│     └── foo.pub
├── known_hosts
└── proxy.example.com.yaml
```

Users can cancel client tools updates using `Ctrl-C`. This may be needed if the
user is on a low bandwidth connection (LTE or public Wi-Fi), if the Teleport
download server is inaccessible, or the user urgently needs to access the
cluster and can not wait for the update to occur.

```
$ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com
Client tools are out of date, updating to vX.Y.Z.
Update progress: [▒▒▒▒▒▒     ] (Ctrl-C to Cancel)

[...]
```

After downloading, client tools will re-execute the downloaded version.  The
child process will inherit all environment variables and flags. Re-execution
will occur only if the parent process is not `tsh` or `tctl`, to prevent
infinite loops.

An environment variable `TELEPORT_TOOLS_VERSION` will be introduced to enable
overriding and using a specific version of client tools. This field can be used

> either as an emergency workaround for a known issue or for debugging purposes

Reviewer 2: The environment var could support a `TELEPORT_TOOLS_VERSION="local"` value to disable automatic updates without promts. This would be set by default in our docker images for example (in such stateless environments you don't want to DL a new tsh/tctl bin, you just want to bump the whole image).

Author: Added support for `TELEPORT_TOOLS_VERSION=off`.

Run "tsh autoupdate enroll" to enroll in automatic updates and keep client
tools like tsh and tctl automatically updated.
```

If the version of client tools is 2 (or more) versions lower than the version
advertised by the cluster or 1 (or more) version greater than the version
advertised by the cluster, an error will be shown and will require the user to
use the `--skip-version-check` flag.

```
$ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com
ERROR: Client tools are N major versions out of date, update to vX.Y.Z.

Some functionality will not work. Update Teleport to vX.Y.Z from
https://goteleport.com/download or your system package manager.

Run "tsh autoupdate enroll" to enroll in automatic updates and keep client
tools like tsh and tctl automatically updated.

Use the "--skip-version-check" flag to bypass this check and attempt to connect
to this cluster.
```

#### Self-managed client tools updates

Cluster administrators that want to self-manage client tools updates will be
able to watch for changes to client tools versions which can then be used to
trigger other integrations (using MDM software like Jamf) to update the
installed version of client tools on endpoints.

```

> $ tctl autoupdate watch

Reviewer 5: Will this command have to store the state somewhere to understand that the version changed? I wonder if for simplicity we should just let users write their own automation that polls /ping endpoint for tools version.

Author: I was thinking it's just built on-top of the watcher. It can just do an initial fetch + print out changes as they come in.

It feels like a nice little tool to have and makes self-managed updates feel like a first class citizen.

{"tools_version": "1.0.0"}
{"tools_version": "1.0.1"}
{"tools_version": "2.0.0"}

[...]
```

Cluster administrators who prefer to use the Teleport API can create a watcher
on the `types.ClusterMaintenanceConfig` resource and trigger other integrations
on changes to the `tools_version` field.

```
// Create a watcher to monitor for changes to client tools version.
watch, err := p.TeleportClient.NewWatcher(ctx, types.Watch{
    Kinds: []types.WatchKind{

>         types.WatchKind{Kind: types.ClusterMaintenanceConfig},

Reviewer 5: Hmm, shouldn't this be watching for changes in actual version reported by ping endpoint, rather than for cluster maintenance config resource changes? Cause this will only "fire" when you update the resource, not when e.g. the cluster is updated, or am I missing something?

Author: Good point, I think I'll just remove this and leave `tctl autoupdate watch`.

Reviewer 2: We don't have watchers for the AU endpoint, and it's answer might not be consistent across proxies currently.
The way the version server is currently working is via configuration at the proxy level. This means we have no cluster-wide version control. This was not intentional, this was a shortcut to implement the proxy version server faster.

I think we might not want to add yet another resource, but we could use the existing CMC to hold the version, maybe adding a `Status` field. 

```
kind: cluster_maintenance_config
spec:
  tools_version: auto | off | X.Y.Z
  [...]
status:
  default_agents_version: x.y.w
  default_tools_version: x.y.z
```

The status would be updated in the following cases:

- when you edit the spec (e.g. change from off to auto, or set a specific version)
- when a Teleport-Clould specific goroutine updates it (this way we can do pull-based if we want)
- when the auth server starts and `tools_version` is `auto` (can it check the lowest known proxy server version?)

This would allow all proxies to watch for updates and answer correctly.

Author: What about this? I'll do is add a helper function to our API that watches for changes to `types.ClusterMaintenanceConfig` and `types.Proxy` and sends the version if it changes over a channel. If `tools_version: X.Y.Z` this will just send changes from `types.ClusterMaintenanceConfig` and in `tools_version: auto` it will send changes when all proxies switch over to a updated version.

It can just keep track of state locally.

for {
    select {
    case e := <-watch.Events():
        if e.Resource == nil {
            continue
        }
        resource, ok := e.Resource.(types.ClusterMaintenanceConfig)
        if !ok {
            continue
        }

        // Process the version change by notifying downstream tooling (like
        // Jamf).
        if err := handle(resource); err != nil {
            log.Printf("Failed to handle version change: %v", err)
        }
    case <-watch.Done():
        fmt.Println("The watcher job is finished.")
        return nil
    }
}
```

##### Cluster configuration

> [!NOTE]
> This resource will not be configurable on Teleport Cloud. It will be managed
> by the Teleport Cloud team.

The `types.ClusterMaintenanceConfig` resource will be updated to include a
`tools_version` field. This field can be updated directly from the resource or
using `tctl`.

```
kind: cluster_maintenance_config
spec:
  # tools_version is the version of client tools the proxy will advertise. Can
  # be auto (match the version of the proxy), off (don't advertise any version),
  # or an exact semver formatted version.
  tools_version: auto | off | X.Y.Z

  [...]

> ```

Reviewer 2: In Cloud context, do we want to block users from setting `tools_version` (e.g. reject anything different than `tools_version: auto`)?

Author: Yes, this resource will not be configurable on Cloud. We already do this for cluster networking config, and we'll extend this to `cluster_maintenance_config`.

  update.

All new self-hosted clusters will be opted into `auto`. This way, by default
even self-hosted customers will have automatic updates available.

Existing clusters will be opted into `off` to not introduce unexpected
behavior.

The `tools_version` field will then be available from the unauthenticated
endpoint `/v1/webapi/ping`.

```
curl https://proxy.example.com/v1/webapi/ping | jq .
{
    "tools_version": "X.Y.Z",

    [...]
}
```

TODO(russjones): Teleport Connect support.

### Costs

Some additional costs will be incurred as Teleport downloads will increase in
frequency.

### Out of scope

How Cloud will push changes to `cluster_maintenance_config` is out of scope
for this RFD and will be handled by a separate Cloud specific RFD.

### Security

The initial version of automatic updates will rely on TLS to establish
connection authenticity to the Teleport download server. The authenticity of
assets served from the download server is out of scope for this RFD. Cluster
administrators concerned with the authenticity of assets served from the
download server can use self-managed updates with system package managers which

> are signed.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to at least validate the hash/signature on download?
- we will very likely need to expose a way for agent AU to get the public key from Teleport so it can validate the downloaded content. Local tooling installer could benefit from this
- We download/write corrupted binaries, especially as we increase the number of downloads. Checking hash after download would prevent this
- TLS is not very strong in corporate environments where each company trusts its own internal CA on the machines. Someone compromising the internal CA would be able to have code execution on any developer laptop.

Reviewer 2: Existing discussion with Jent: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/30317#discussion_r1297653526

Author: I don't have a problem with checking the hash to validate the binary has not been corrupted.

I don't think we should develop a new signing scheme, because by the time we end up mitigating all the edge cases, we end up at TUF anyway. Might as well implement TUF as part of Phase 2.

date, either using automatic updates or self-managed updates.

Keeping client tools updated helps with security (fixes for known security
vulnerabilities are pushed to endpoints), bugs (fixes for resolved issues are
pushed to endpoints), and compatibility (users no longer have to learn and
understand [Teleport component
compatibility](https://goteleport.com/docs/upgrading/overview/#component-compatibility)
rules).

## Details

### Summary

Client tools (like `tsh` and `tctl`) will automatically download and install
the version of client tools recommended by the Teleport cluster.

The `cluster_maintenance_config` resource will be updated to include a
`tools_version` field to control the version of client tools advertised by the
cluster. This resource will not be configurable on Teleport Cloud. It will be
managed by the Teleport Cloud team.

If cluster administrators want to opt-out of automatic updates and manage
updates themselves, they will be able to watch the `cluster_maintenance_config`
resource for changes and push out updates to endpoints manually.

Inspiration drawn from https://go.dev/doc/toolchain.

### Implementation

#### Client tools

##### Automatic updates

> The first time a user executes `tsh login` with a version of `tsh` that

Reviewer 9: Should we plan to release client tools auto updates in a staged rollout?

Looking at how agent auto updates rollout has turned out, it might be worth considering a staged rollout where we release this feature to internal, trial, and team plans first. Once we've tested for a while, we can start rolling it out for enterprise.

If the feature is released with some bugs, I could see some users disabling the feature and never think about re-enabling it.

Author: That should be possible since `cluster_maintenance_config` is a per-cluster resource. I'll cover that part in a Cloud specific RFD.

supports automatic updates, the user will be prompted to enroll in automatic

> updates. This choice will be saved in client tools configuration.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
updates. This choice will be saved in tsh's local configuration.
```

```
$ tsh --proxy=proxy.example.com login
Keep client tools like tsh and tctl automatically updated? [YES/no]

[...]
```

```
$ cat ~/.tsh/config/config.yaml
enable_autoupdate: true | false
```

Once enrolled, upon login client tools will check the `tools_version`
advertised by the cluster at `/v1/webapi/ping`. If this version differs from
that of the running binary, the recommended version will be downloaded and
installed.

The original binaries will not be overwritten by automatic updates, instead
per-cluster binaries with permissions `0555` will be stored at

> `~/.tsh/bin/proxyName/{tctl,tsh}`. A locking mechanism built around

Author: Good point, see my reply in the earlier thread: https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/39805#discussion_r1538232471

[syscall.Flock](https://pkg.go.dev/syscall#Flock) on Linux and macOS and

> [LockFileEx](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/fileapi/nf-fileapi-lockfileex)

Reviewer 8: We've had some issues with file locks on Windows, I'd look at lib/utils/fs_windows.go when it comes time to implement.

Author: Yeah, the plan is to review (and maybe just use if I can) and maybe even just copy what Go does: https://github.com/golang/go/tree/master/src/cmd/go/internal/lockedfile

Update Teleport to vX.Y.Z from https://goteleport.com/download or your system
package manager.

Run "tsh autoupdate enroll" to enroll in automatic updates and keep client
tools like tsh and tctl automatically updated.

[...]
```

If the version of client tools is 1 major version below the version advertised
by the cluster, a warning will be shown that indicates some functionality may
not work.

```
$ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com
WARNING: Client tools are 1 major version out of date, update to vX.Y.Z.

Some functionality may not work. Update Teleport to vX.Y.Z from
https://goteleport.com/download or your system package manager.

Run "tsh autoupdate enroll" to enroll in automatic updates and keep client
tools like tsh and tctl automatically updated.
```

If the version of client tools is 2 (or more) versions lower than the version
advertised by the cluster or 1 (or more) version greater than the version
advertised by the cluster, an error will be shown and will require the user to
use the `--skip-version-check` flag.

```
$ tsh login --proxy=proxy.example.com
ERROR: Client tools are N major versions out of date, update to vX.Y.Z.

> Some functionality will not work. Update Teleport to vX.Y.Z from

Reviewer 8: I'd use a strong message here and say something like "Your cluster requires tsh vN or later"

When `tsh login` is executed, client tools will check `/v1/webapi/ping` to
determine if automatic updates are enabled. If the cluster's required version
differs from the current binary, client tools will download and re-execute
using the version required by the cluster. All other `tsh` subcommands (like
`tsh ssh ...`) will always use the downloaded version.

The original client tools binaries won't be overwritten. Instead, an additional
binary will be downloaded and stored in `~/.tsh/bin` with `0755` permissions.

> A hash of the binary will be performed and checked against a known value to

Author: Updated RFD.

Automatic updates will not be used if `tctl` is connecting to the Auth Service
over localhost.

> [!NOTE]
> If a user connects to multiple root clusters, each running a different
> version of Teleport, client tools will attempt to download the differing

> > version of Teleport each time the user performs a `tsh login`.

Author: We'll bring it back later, it was going to be too much work for the initial release.

We'd have to maintain independent `~/.tsh` profiles for each cluster to maintain backward and forward compatibility AND some shared state to indicate which cluster the user is currently logged into.

A good example that illustrates the complexity, we would have to support new CLI flags even if the original binary that was installed does not know about them.
